We have grown far too sentimental . . . Devotionalism and
cheap psychology on one side, and arrogance and dogmatic
intolerance on the other distort authentic religious life almost
beyond recognition. Sometimes I come close to despair, but
then I live tenaciously and always with hope . . . Honest
religion, more familiar than its critics with the distortions and
absurdities perpetrated in its name, has an active interest in
encouraging a healthy skepticism for its own purposes . . .
There is the possibility for religion and science to forge a
potent partnership against pseudo-science. Strangely, I think
it would soon be engaged also in opposing pseudo-religion. 
The Most Precious Thing
Pseudoscience differs from erroneous science. Science thrives on
errors, cutting them away one by one. False conclusions are drawn
all the time, but they are drawn tentatively. Hypotheses are
framed so they are capable of being disproved. A succession of
alternative hypotheses is confronted by experiment and observation. Science gropes and staggers toward improved understanding. Proprietary feelings are of course offended when a scientific
hypothesis is disproved, but such disproofs are recognized as
central to the scientific enterprise.
Pseudoscience is just the opposite. Hypotheses are often framed
precisely so they are invulnerable to any experiment that offers a
prospect of disproof, so even in principle they cannot be invalidated.
Practitioners are defensive and wary. Sceptical scrutiny is opposed.
When the pseudoscientific hypothesis fails to catch fire with scientists, conspiracies to suppress it are deduced.
Motor ability in healthy people is almost perfect. We rarely
stumble and fall, except in young and old age. We can learn tasks
such as riding a bicycle or skating or skipping, jumping rope or
driving a car, and retain that mastery for the rest of our lives.
Even if we've gone a decade without doing it, it comes back to us
effortlessly. The precision and retention of our motor skills may,
however, give us a false sense of confidence in our other talents.
Our perceptions are fallible. We sometimes see what isn't there.
We are prey to optical illusions. Occasionally we hallucinate. We
are error-prone. A most illuminating book called How We Know
What Isn't So: The Fallibility of Human Reason in Everyday Life,
by Thomas Gilovich, shows how people systematically err in
understanding numbers, in rejecting unpleasant evidence, in being
influenced by the opinions of others. We're good in some things, but
not in everything. Wisdom lies in understanding our limitations. 'For
Man is a giddy thing,' teaches William Shakespeare. That's where
the stuffy sceptical rigour of science comes in.
Perhaps the sharpest distinction between science and pseudoscience is that science has a far keener appreciation of human
imperfections and fallibility than does pseudoscience (or 'inerrant'
revelation). If we resolutely refuse to acknowledge where we are
liable to fall into error, then we can confidently expect that error -
even serious error, profound mistakes - will be our companion
25 
THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD
forever. But if we are capable of a little courageous selfassessment, whatever rueful reflections they may engender, our
chances improve enormously.
If we teach only the findings and products of science - no matter
how useful and even inspiring they may be - without communicating its critical method, how can the average person possibly
distinguish science from pseudoscience? Both then are presented
as unsupported assertion. In Russia and China, it used to be easy.
Authoritative science was what the authorities taught. The distinction between science and pseudoscience was made for you. No
perplexities needed to be muddled through. But when profound
political changes occurred and strictures on free thought were
loosened, a host of confident or charismatic claims - especially
those that told us what we wanted to hear - gained a vast
following. Every notion, however improbable, became authoritative.
It is a supreme challenge for the popularizer of science to make
clear the actual, tortuous history of its great discoveries and the
misapprehensions and occasional stubborn refusal by its practitioners to change course. Many, perhaps most, science textbooks
for budding scientists tread lightly here. It is enormously easier to
present in an appealing way the wisdom distilled from centuries of
patient and collective interrogation of Nature than to detail the
messy distillation apparatus. The method of science, as stodgy and
grumpy as it may seem, is far more important than the findings of
science.
26 
2
Science and Hope
Two men came to a hole in the sky. One asked the other to
lift him up . . . But so beautiful was it in heaven that the
man who looked in over the edge forgot everything, forgot
his companion whom he had promised to help up and simply
ran off into all the splendour of heaven.
from an Iglulik Inuit prose poem,
early twentieth century, told by Inugpasugjuk to
Knud Rasmussen, the Greenlandic arctic explorer
I
was a child in a time of hope. I wanted to be a scientist from my
earliest school days. The crystallizing moment came when I first
caught on that the stars are mighty suns, when it first dawned on me
how staggeringly far away they must be to appear as mere points of
light in the sky. I'm not sure I even knew the meaning of the word
'science' then, but I wanted somehow to immerse myself in all that
grandeur. I was gripped by the splendour of the Universe, transfixed
by the prospect of understanding how things really work, of helping
to uncover deep mysteries, of exploring new worlds - maybe even
literally. It has been my good fortune to have had that dream in part
fulfilled. For me, the romance of science remains as appealing and
new as it was on that day, more than half a century ago, when I was
shown the wonders of the 1939 World's Fair.
Popularizing science - trying to make its methods and
findings accessible to non-scientists - then follows naturally and
27 
THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD
immediately. Not explaining science seems to me perverse.
When you're in love, you want to tell the world. This book is a
personal statement, reflecting my lifelong love affair with
science.
But there's another reason: science is more than a body of
knowledge; it is a way of thinking. I have a foreboding of an
America in my children's or grandchildren's time - when the
United States is a service and information economy; when nearly
all the key manufacturing industries have slipped away to other
countries; when awesome technological powers are in the hands of
a very few, and no one representing the public interest can even
grasp the issues; when the people have lost the ability to set their
own agendas or knowledgeably question those in authority; when,
clutching our crystals and nervously consulting our horoscopes,
our critical faculties in decline, unable to distinguish between what
feels good and what's true, we slide, almost without noticing, back
into superstition and darkness. The dumbing down of America is
most evident in the slow decay of substantive content in the
enormously influential media, the 30-second sound bites (now
down to 10 seconds or less), lowest common denominator
programming, credulous presentations on pseudoscience and
superstition, but especially a kind of celebration of ignorance. As
I write, the number one video cassette rental in America is the
movie Dumb and Dumber. Beavis and Butthead remains popular
(and influential) with young TV viewers. The plain lesson is that
study and learning - not just of science, but of anything - are
avoidable, even undesirable.
We've arranged a global civilization in which most crucial
elements - transportation, communications, and all other industries; agriculture, medicine, education, entertainment, protecting
the environment; and even the key democratic institution of
voting - profoundly depend on science and technology. We have
also arranged things so that almost no one understands science
and technology. This is a prescription for disaster. We might get
away with it for a while, but sooner or later this combustible
mixture of ignorance and power is going to blow up in our faces.
A Candle in the Dark is the title of a courageous, largely
Biblically based, book by Thomas Ady, published in London in
28 
Science and Hope
1656, attacking the witch-hunts then in progress as a scam 'to
delude the people'. Any illness or storm, anything out of the
ordinary, was popularly attributed to witchcraft. Witches must
exist, Ady quoted the 'witchmongers' as arguing, 'else how should
these things be, or come to pass?' For much of our history, we
were so fearful of the outside world, with its unpredictable
dangers, that we gladly embraced anything that promised to
soften or explain away the terror. Science is an attempt, largely
successful, to understand the world, to get a grip on things, to get
hold of ourselves, to steer a safe course. Microbiology and
meteorology now explain what only a few centuries ago was
considered sufficient cause to burn women to death.
Ady also warned of the danger that 'the Nations [will] perish for
lack of knowledge'. Avoidable human misery is more often caused
not so much by stupidity as by ignorance, particularly our
ignorance about ourselves. I worry that, especially as the millennium edges nearer, pseudoscience and superstition will seem year
by year more tempting, the siren song of unreason more sonorous
and attractive. Where have we heard it before? Whenever our
ethnic or national prejudices are aroused, in times of scarcity,
during challenges to national self-esteem or nerve, when we
agonize about our diminished cosmic place and purpose, or when
fanaticism is bubbling up around us - then, habits of thought
familiar from ages past reach for the controls.
The candle flame gutters. Its little pool of light trembles.
Darkness gathers. The demons begin to stir.
There is much that science doesn't understand, many mysteries
still to be resolved. In a Universe tens of billions of light years
across and some ten or fifteen billion years old, this may be the
case forever. We are constantly stumbling on surprises. Yet some
New Age and religious writers assert that scientists believe that
'what they find is all there is'. Scientists may reject mystic
revelations for which there is no evidence except somebody's
say-so, but they hardly believe their knowledge of Nature to be
complete.
Science is far from a perfect instrument of knowledge. It's just
the best we have. In this respect, as in many others, it's like
29 
THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD
democracy. Science by itself cannot advocate courses of human
action, but it can certainly illuminate the possible consequences of
alternative courses of action.
The scientific way of thinking is at once imaginative and
disciplined. This is central to its success. Science invites us to let
the facts in, even when they don't conform to our preconceptions.
It counsels us to carry alternative hypotheses in our heads and see
which best fit the facts. It urges on us a delicate balance between
no-holds-barred openness to new ideas, however heretical, and
the most rigorous sceptical scrutiny of everything - new ideas and
established wisdom. This kind of thinking is also an essential tool
for a democracy in an age of change.
One of the reasons for its success is that science has built-in,
error-correcting machinery at its very heart. Some may consider
this an overbroad characterization, but to me every time we
exercise self-criticism, every time we test our ideas against the
outside world, we are doing science. When we are self-indulgent
and uncritical, when we confuse hopes and facts, we slide into
pseudoscience and superstition.
Every time a scientific paper presents a bit of data, it's
accompanied by an error bar - a quiet but insistent reminder that
no knowledge is complete or perfect. It's a calibration of how
much we trust what we think we know. If the error bars are small,
the accuracy of our empirical knowledge is high; if the error bars
are large, then so is the uncertainty in our knowledge. Except in
pure mathematics nothing is known for certain (although much is
certainly false).
Moreover, scientists are usually careful to characterize the
veridical status of their attempts to understand the world - ranging
from conjectures and hypotheses, which are highly tentative, all
the way up to laws of Nature which are repeatedly and systematically confirmed through many interrogations of how the world
works. But even laws of Nature are not absolutely certain. There
may be new circumstances never before examined - inside black
holes, say, or within the electron, or close to the speed of light -
where even our vaunted laws of Nature break down and, however
valid they may be in ordinary circumstances, need correction.
Humans may crave absolute certainty; they may aspire to it;
30 
Science and Hope
they may pretend, as partisans of certain religions do, to have
attained it. But the history of science - by far the most successful
claim to knowledge accessible to humans - teaches that the most
we can hope for is successive improvement in our understanding,
learning from our mistakes, an asymptotic approach to the
Universe, but with the proviso that absolute certainty will always
elude us.
We will always be mired in error. The most each generation can
hope for is to reduce the error bars a little, and to add to the body
of data to which error bars apply. The error bar is a pervasive,
visible self-assessment of the reliability of our knowledge. You
often see error bars in public opinion polls ('an uncertainty of plus
or minus three per cent', say). Imagine a society in which every
speech in the Congressional Record, every television commercial,
every sermon had an accompanying error bar or its equivalent.
One of the great commandments of science is, 'Mistrust arguments from authority'. (Scientists, being primates, and thus given
to dominance hierarchies, of course do not always follow this
commandment.) Too many such arguments have proved too
painfully wrong. Authorities must prove their contentions like
everybody else. This independence of science, its occasional
unwillingness to accept conventional wisdom, makes it dangerous
to doctrines less self-critical, or with pretensions to certitude.
Because science carries us toward an understanding of how the
world is, rather than how we would wish it to be, its findings may
not in all cases be immediately comprehensible or satisfying. It
may take a little work to restructure our mindsets. Some of
science is very simple. When it gets complicated, that's usually
because the world is complicated - or because we're complicated.
When we shy away from it because it seems too difficult (or
because we've been taught so poorly), we surrender the ability to
take charge of our future. We are disenfranchised. Our selfconfidence erodes.
But when we pass beyond the barrier, when the findings and
methods of science get through to us, when we understand and put
this knowledge to use, many feel deep satisfaction. This is true for
everyone, but especially for children - born with a zest for
knowledge, aware that they must live in a future moulded by
31 
THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD
science, but so often convinced in their adolescence that science is
not for them. I know personally, both from having science
explained to me and from my attempts to explain it to others, how
gratifying it is when we get it, when obscure terms suddenly take
on meaning, when we grasp what all the fuss is about, when deep
wonders are revealed.
In its encounter with Nature, science invariably elicits a sense of
reverence and awe. The very act of understanding is a celebration of
joining, merging, even if on a very modest scale, with the magnificence of the Cosmos. And the cumulative worldwide build-up of
knowledge over time converts science into something only a little
short of a trans-national, trans-generational meta-mind.
'Spirit' comes from the Latin word 'to breathe'. What we
breathe is air, which is certainly matter, however thin. Despite
usage to the contrary, there is no necessary implication in the
word 'spiritual' that we are talking of anything other than matter
(including the matter of which the brain is made), or anything
outside the realm of science. On occasion, I will feel free to use
the word. Science is not only compatible with spirituality; it is a
profound source of spirituality. When we recognize our place in
an immensity of light years and in the passage of ages, when we
grasp the intricacy, beauty and subtlety of life, then that soaring
feeling, that sense of elation and humility combined, is surely
spiritual. So are our emotions in the presence of great art or music
or literature, or of acts of exemplary selfless courage such as those
of Mohandas Gandhi or Martin Luther King Jr. The notion that
science and spirituality are somehow mutually exclusive does a
disservice to both.
Science may be hard to understand. It may challenge cherished
beliefs. When its products are placed at the disposal of politicians
or industrialists, it may lead to weapons of mass destruction and
grave threats to the environment. But one thing you have to say
about it: it delivers the goods.
Not every branch of science can foretell the future - palaeontology
can't - but many can and with stunning accuracy. If you want to
know when the next eclipse of the Sun will be, you might try
magicians or mystics, but you'll do much better with scientists. They


DENVER — Tall and imposing, indomitable even, 6-foot-8 with shoulders and a back broad enough to push a pickup truck.

He was a star lineman on a state championship team in high school and for the University of Colorado Buffaloes, where he set a team record for starts and minutes played. He was an Associated Press third-team all-American and played three years in the N.F.L.

Yet the word that jumps most quickly to mind when talking to Ryan Miller is “fragile.”

Hits, concussive and subconcussive, have laid him low. Head bursting, nausea rising, please shut off the lights, please. I interviewed Miller twice, our talks separated by 22 months, and he is doing better, which is not to suggest this thoughtful and soft-spoken 29-year-old is anywhere near what he wants to be.

When I met him in 2017 Miller had spent the previous hour in a darkened room, breathing slowly. He would get into his car and sit for hours, trying to remember where he intended to go. He would walk into airports, and lights and noise and crowds made him want to curl into a fetal ball. Since then he has gotten better with therapy and diet, and he has lost a lot of weight. He’s healthier, and yet. …

“I don’t live as much in fear of what will happen next, and it’s been a year since I have had a seizure,” he told me. “It’s been a long road. It still is a long road.”

The brutality of the N.F.L. and its malefactions and lack of care for players’ bodies and minds are well known. But the time a player spends in college, including Miller’s tenure in the savage trenches of an offensive line, wreaks great damage, too, and that raises a pointed question: How can universities, places of higher learning that are devoted to the development of young minds and that in some cases spend millions of dollars researching the ill effects of brain injuries, justify running multimillion-dollar football machines that put those brains at risk of lifelong damage?
The University of Colorado is in measurable ways better on health than some top-ranked college programs. Yet former Buffaloes players have suffered brain and emotional damage, and some have taken their own lives. The roll call of the Colorado dead includes running back Rashaan Salaam, at age 42; linebacker Drew Wahlroos, 37; and tight end Tennyson McCarty, 32. Much evidence points to the likelihood that these men suffered emotional and cognitive problems as a result of too many hits. Wahlroos’s brain was donated to the Boston University Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy center. Results have not yet been released.

Some Colorado regents have begun to ask questions. “Football as played in America is a brutal 19th century sport that is highly destructive to the human brain,” Linda Shoemaker told fellow regents. “I don’t believe it has a place in the academic enterprise that is the University of Colorado.”

Marc Stein's Newsletter
Marc Stein has covered Jordan. He's covered Kobe. And LeBron vs. the Warriors. Go behind the N.B.A.'s curtain with the league's foremost expert.

SIGN UP
I will return tomorrow to their challenge to the college football industry. Today the focus is on a man consumed with a search to feel normal again. I first found my way to Miller’s suburban home southwest of Denver, the snow-capped Rockies glimmering in the distance, after reading about him in The Denver Post in 2017.

He hails from an athletic family and took up tackle football in grade school. He adored it, the running, the playmaking, the hitting. Robert Cantu, a doctor who helped start the C.T.E. Center at Boston University, studies the brain health of athletes and says the risk of emotional and cognitive damage is three times higher for those N.F.L. players who played tackle before age 12.

Miller played continuously until, as a 285-pound teenager, he became the core of a legendary high school offensive line, the “Great Wall of Columbine.”

“To have size and weight and skill advantages over all those poor high school kids, man,” he said. “I don’t want to toot my horn, but we were talented.”

He smiled distantly at old conceits. “Yeah, well. You reap what you sow, right?”

By which he meant he reaped lots of head whacks for years on end. He had at least one concussion in high school. “I sat out a day or two and played the next week,” he said.




Chapter 4


When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how very
much she admired him.

“He is just what a young man ought to be,” said she, “sensible,
good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!--so much
ease, with such perfect good breeding!”

“He is also handsome,” replied Elizabeth, “which a young man ought
likewise to be, if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete.”

“I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I
did not expect such a compliment.”

“Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference between
us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. What
could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help
seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman
in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is
very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a
stupider person.”

“Dear Lizzy!”

“Oh! you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.
You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable
in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in your
life.”

“I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak
what I think.”

“I know you do; and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
others! Affectation of candour is common enough--one meets with it
everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design--to take the
good of everybody's character and make it still better, and say nothing
of the bad--belongs to you alone. And so you like this man's sisters,
too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his.”

“Certainly not--at first. But they are very pleasing women when you
converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep
his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
neighbour in her.”

Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour at
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister,
and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself, she
was very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fine
ladies; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in the
power of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud and
conceited. They were rather handsome, had been educated in one of the
first private seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousand
pounds, were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and of
associating with people of rank, and were therefore in every respect
entitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of others. They were of
a respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeply
impressed on their memories than that their brother's fortune and their
own had been acquired by trade.

Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an
estate, but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and
sometimes made choice of his county; but as he was now provided with a
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the
remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
purchase.

His sisters were anxious for his having an estate of his own; but,
though he was now only established as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no
means unwilling to preside at his table--nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had
married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider
his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of
age two years, when he was tempted by an accidental recommendation
to look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it for
half-an-hour--was pleased with the situation and the principal
rooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took it
immediately.

Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of
great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the
easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition
could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he
never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy's regard, Bingley
had the firmest reliance, and of his judgement the highest opinion.
In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means
deficient, but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,
reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though well-bred, were not
inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley
was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continually
giving offense.

The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently
characteristic. Bingley had never met with more pleasant people or
prettier girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive
to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt
acquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he could not
conceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a
collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for
none of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none received
either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty,
but she smiled too much.

Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so--but still they admired
her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one
whom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore
established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorized by such
commendation to think of her as he chose.


Chapter 5


Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade
in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the
honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty.
The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It had given him a
disgust to his business, and to his residence in a small market town;
and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house
about a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge,
where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and,
unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all
the world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render him
supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By
nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St.
James's had made him courteous.

Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest
of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was
Elizabeth's intimate friend.

That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over
a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.

“_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Mrs. Bennet with civil
self-command to Miss Lucas. “_You_ were Mr. Bingley's first choice.”

“Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.”

“Oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be
sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed I rather believe he
_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something
about Mr. Robinson.”

“Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did not
I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson's asking him how he liked our Meryton
assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many
pretty women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his
answering immediately to the last question: 'Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet,
beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.'”

“Upon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed--that does seem as
if--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.”

“_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza,” said
Charlotte. “Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,
is he?--poor Eliza!--to be only just _tolerable_.”

“I beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by his
ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quite
a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he
sat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips.”

“Are you quite sure, ma'am?--is not there a little mistake?” said Jane.
“I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.”

“Aye--because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
could not help answering her; but she said he seemed quite angry at
being spoke to.”

“Miss Bingley told me,” said Jane, “that he never speaks much,
unless among his intimate acquaintances. With _them_ he is remarkably
agreeable.”

“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very
agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it
was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had
heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come to
the ball in a hack chaise.”

“I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long,” said Miss Lucas, “but I
wish he had danced with Eliza.”

“Another time, Lizzy,” said her mother, “I would not dance with _him_,
if I were you.”

“I believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him.”

“His pride,” said Miss Lucas, “does not offend _me_ so much as pride
often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_
to be proud.”

“That is very true,” replied Elizabeth, “and I could easily forgive
_his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_.”

“Pride,” observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her
reflections, “is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have
ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may
be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of
ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us.”

“If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy,” cried a young Lucas, who came with
his sisters, “I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of
foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine a day.”

“Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought,” said Mrs.
Bennet; “and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle
directly.”

The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she
would, and the argument ended only with the visit.
