It is the central question in quantum mechanics, and no one knows the answer: What really happens in a 
superposition—the peculiar circumstance in which particles seem to be in two or more places or states at once? 
Now, in a new paper a team of researchers in Israel and Japan has proposed an experiment that could finally let us say 
something for sure about the nature of this puzzling phenomenon.
Their experiment, which the researchers say could be carried out within a few months, should enable scientists to sneak 
a glance at where an object—in this case a particle of light, called a photon—actually resides when it is placed in a 
superposition. And the researchers predict the answer will be even stranger and more shocking than “two places at once.”
The classic example of a superposition involves firing photons at two parallel slits in a barrier. One fundamental aspect
of quantum mechanics is that tiny particles can behave like waves, so that those passing through one slit “interfere” 
with those going through the other, their wavy ripples either boosting or canceling one another to create a characteristic
pattern on a detector screen. The odd thing, though, is this interference occurs even if only one particle is fired at a 
time. The particle seems somehow to pass through both slits at once, interfering with itself. That’s a superposition.
And it gets weirder: Measuring which slit such a particle goes through will invariably indicate it only goes through 
one—but then the wavelike interference (the “quantumness,” if you will) vanishes. The very act of measurement seems to 
“collapse” the superposition. “We know something fishy is going on in a superposition,” says physicist Avshalom Elitzur of
the Israeli Institute for Advanced Research. “But you’re not allowed to measure it. This is what makes quantum mechanics 
so diabolical.”
For decades researchers have stalled at this apparent impasse. They cannot say exactly what a superposition is without 
looking at it; but if they try to look at it, it disappears. One potential solution—developed by Elitzur’s former mentor, 
Israeli physicist Yakir Aharonov, now at Chapman University, and his collaborators—suggests a way to deduce something 
about quantum particles before measuring them. Aharonov’s approach is called the two-state-vector formalism (TSVF) of 
quantum mechanics, and postulates quantum events are in some sense determined by quantum states not just in the past—but 
also in the future. That is, the TSVF assumes quantum mechanics works the same way both forward and backward in time. 
From this perspective, causes can seem to propagate backward in time, occurring after their effects.
But one needn’t take this strange notion literally. Rather, in the TSVF one can gain retrospective knowledge of what 
happened in a quantum system by selecting the outcome: Instead of simply measuring where a particle ends up, a researcher
chooses a particular location in which to look for it. This is called post-selection, and it supplies more information 
than any unconditional peek at outcomes ever could. This is because the particle’s state at any instant is being evaluated
retrospectively in light of its entire history, up to and including measurement. The oddness comes in because it looks as
if the researcher—simply by choosing to look for a particular outcome—then causes that outcome to happen. But this is a 
bit like concluding that if you turn on your television when your favorite program is scheduled, your action causes that 
program to be broadcast at that very moment. “It’s generally accepted that the TSVF is mathematically equivalent to 
standard quantum mechanics,” says David Wallace, a philosopher of science at the University of Southern California who specializes in interpretations of quantum mechanics. “But it does lead to seeing certain things one wouldn’t otherwise have seen.”

Take, for instance, a version of the double-slit experiment devised by Aharonov and co-worker Lev Vaidman in 2003, which they interpreted with the TSVF. The pair described (but did not build) an optical system in which a single photon acts as a “shutter” that closes a slit by causing another “probe” photon approaching the slit to be reflected back the way it came. By applying post-selection to the measurements of the probe photon, Aharonov and Vaidman showed, one could discern a shutter photon in a superposition closing both (or indeed arbitrarily many) slits simultaneously. In other words, this thought experiment would in theory allow one to say with confidence the shutter photon is both “here” and “there” at once. Although this situation seems paradoxical from our everyday experience, it is one well-studied aspect of the so-called “nonlocal” properties of quantum particles, where the whole notion of a well-defined location in space dissolves.

In 2016 physicists Ryo Okamoto and Shigeki Takeuchi of Kyoto University verified Aharonov and Vaidman’s predictions experimentally using a light-carrying circuit in which the shutter photon is created using a quantum router, a device that lets one photon control the route taken by another. “This was a pioneering experiment that allowed one to infer the simultaneous position of a particle in two places,” says Elitzur’s colleague Eliahu Cohen of the University of Ottawa in Ontario.